.TH djbdnscurve6: dnstrace 1
.SH NAME
dnstrace \- dns lookup tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnstrace 
.I t
.I fqdn
.I r
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dnstrace
searches for all DNS servers
that can affect the resolution of records of type  
.I t
under the domain name 
.IR fqdn ,
starting from the root server
.IR r .
You can list more than one root server.

.B dnstrace
uses the standard DNS resolution algorithm,
but follows all possible paths in the algorithm.
It prints all responses it receives from DNS servers;
it also prints warnings about slow servers, dead servers,
misdelegated (``lame'') servers, and misformatted packets.
.B dnstrace
is similar in spirit to DOC and dnswalk
but is much more effective than those tools at debugging resolution problems.

You can pipe
.B dnstrace
through
.BR dnstracesort 
for human-friendly output.
.B dnstrace
can take a long time to run,
so standard procedure is to save its output in a file:

.EX
  dnstrace any www.aol.com a.root-servers.net > AOL &
.EE

Then you can run
.BR dnstracesort 
to see the results so far:

.EX
  dnstracesort < AOL | less
.EE

The
.BR dnstracesort 
output uses
.I ul
codes
for boldface and underline;
these codes are displayed properly by
.BR less .

Beware that, as of February 2000,
.B dnstrace
produces half a megabyte of output
for the complete trace of a typical 
.I .com
name
starting from all the root servers.
There are more than 200 computers around the world
that can affect all 
.I .com
names.
Including IPv6 address lookup (June 2018)
the amount of output data is roughly doubled.
.SH SEE ALSO
dnsip(1),
dnsipq(1),
dnsmx(1),
dnstxt(1),
dnsqr(1),
dnsq(1),
dnsname(1),
less(1)
.SH REFERENCE
http://cr.yp.to/djbdns.html
