.TH djbdnscurve6: qualification 5

.SH NAME
qualification \- User's guide to name qualification

.SH OVERVIEW
.B Qualification
means conversion
of a short host name that you type, such as 
.IR cheetah ,
into a complete (``fully qualified'') domain name,
such as 
.IR cheetah.heaven.af.mil .

This page explains the qualification rules
followed by the
.I dns_ip4_qualify
library routine in djbdns.

.SH Rewriting instructions
Normally 
.I dns_ip4_qualify
follows instructions listed in 
.IR /etc/dnsrewrite ,
a file created by your system administrator.
You can override these instructions
by creating your own file
and setting the 
.I $DNSREWRITEFILE
environment variable
to the name of that file.

Sample instructions:

  # anything.local -> me
  -.local:me
  # me -> 127.0.0.1
  =me:127.0.0.1
  # any.name.a -> any.name.af.mil
  *.a:.af.mil
  # any-name-without-dots -> any-name-without-dots.heaven.af.mil
  ?:.heaven.af.mil
  # remove trailing dot
  *.:

Instructions are followed in order, each at most once.
There are four types of instructions:
.TP
.RI = post\fR:\fInew\fR
means that the host name 
.I post
is replaced by 
.IR new .
.TP
.RI * post\fR:\fInew\fR
means that any name of the form 
.I prepost
is replaced by 
.IR prenew .
.TP
.RI ? post\fR:\fInew\fR
means that any name of the form 
.IR prepost ,
where 
.I pre
does not contain dots or brackets,
is replaced by 
.IR prenew .
.TP
.RI - post\fR:\fInew\fR
means that any name of the form 
.I prepost
is replaced by 
.IR new .

.SH Searching

.I dns_ip4_qualify
can search through DNS for several possible qualifications of a name.
For example, the name

cheetah+.heaven.af.mil+.af.mil

is qualified as 
.I cheetah.heaven.af.mil
if that name has IP addresses listed in DNS,
or 
.I cheetah.af.mil
otherwise.

In general,
.IR x +\fIy1\fR+\fIy2\fR+\fIy3\fR
is qualified as 
.I xy1
if 
.I xy1
has IP addresses listed in DNS;
otherwise, as 
.I xy2
if 
.I xy2
has IP addresses listed in DNS;
otherwise, as 
.IR xy3 .
You can list any number of +'s.

Searching is applied after rewriting,
so you can use a rewriting instruction such as

?:+.heaven.af.mil+.af.mil

to have
.I lion
qualified as 
.I lion.heaven.af.mil
or 
.IR lion.af.mil ,
and
.I tiger
qualified as 
.I tiger.heaven.af.mil
or 
.IR tiger.af.mil ,
and so on.

Searching is generally not a recommended feature.
If you rely on 
.I gw
being qualified as 
.IR gw.af.mil ,
and someone suddenly adds a new 
.IR gw.heaven.af.mil ,
you'll end up talking to the wrong host.
It's better to rely on syntactic rules that you control.

.SH Compatibility mechanisms
If the rewriting-instructions file does not exist,
.I dns_ip4_qualify
looks for a local domain name in three places:
.TP
1.
the 
.I $LOCALDOMAIN
environment variable, if it is set; or
.TP
2.
the first 
.I domain
or 
.I search
line
in 
.IR /etc/resolv.conf ,
if 
.I /etc/resolv.conf
exists and has such a line; or
.TP
3.
everything after the first dot in the system's hostname.
.P
It then creates rewriting instructions of the form

  ?:.\fIdomain\fR
  *.:

so that 
.RI . domain
is added to any name without dots or brackets.

You can specify searching in 
.I $LOCALDOMAIN
by using several domain names separated by spaces.
Your system administrator can specify searching in 
.I /etc/resolv.conf
by putting several domains on a 
.I search
line.

.SH Compatibility notes
Most DNS client libraries don't support 
.I /etc/dnsrewrite
or 
.IR $DNSREWRITEFILE .

Some DNS client libraries interpret a 
.I domain
line in 
.I /etc/resolv.conf
as specifying a search list consisting of various suffixes of the domain.

With most DNS client libraries,
a long-running program won't see changes in 
.IR /etc/resolv.conf .
.I dns_ip4_qualify
checks for changes every ten minutes.

Many DNS client libraries will search the local domain
for names 
.I with
dots.
This almost certainly isn't what you want.
However, if it is, you can simulate it through rewriting:

  # aol.com -&gt; aol.com or aol.com.heaven.af.mil
  *:++.heaven.af.mil
  # but skip directly to heaven.af.mil if no dots
  ?++.heaven.af.mil:.heaven.af.mil

.SH SEE ALSO
dnsipq(1)
.SH REFERECNE
http://cr.yp.to/djbdns.html
