.TH djbdnscurve6: rbldns-data 8
.SH NAME
rbldns-data \- blacklist generation for rbldns
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rbldns-data
reads an IP address list
from a file named 
.I data
in the current directory.
It creates 
.I data.cdb
in a binary format designed for
fast access by 
.BR rbldns .

.B rbldns-data
updates 
.I data.cdb
atomically,
so you can use it safely while 
.B rbldns 
is running.
If anything goes wrong with the creation of 
.IR data.cdb ,
.B rbldns-data
stops and leaves the old 
.I data.cdb
in place.
.SH DATA FORMAT
.RI ip4
: The IPv4 address 
.I ip4
given in dotted decimal format is on the list.

.RI ip4\fR/\fIn
: All IPv4 addresses that share the first 
.I n
bits of the IP address 
.I ip4
are on the list.
For example, 
.I 1.2.3./24
means all 
.I 1.2.3.*
addresses.

.RI ip6 
: The IPv6 address 
.I ip6
provided in compactified format is on the list.

.RI ip6\fR/\fIn
: All IPv6 addresses sharing the first
.I n
bits of 
.I ip6
are considered.
A rule
.I 2002:/16
would block all 6to4 addresses.
For practical reasons, 
.I n
needs to smaller/equal than
.IR 64 ,
since the lower bits of an IPv6 address
denominates the link token and is
not relevant for routing.

.RI =a\fR:\fItxt\fR
: DNS queries for addresses on the list
will receive an A record of 
.I a
and a TXT record of 
.IR txt .
Typically 
.I a
is 
.I 127.0.0.2
and 
.I txt
is a pointer to a web page about the list.

If 
.I txt
ends with 
.IR $ ,
.B rbldns
replaces the 
.I $
with the IP address. 

.RI # comment
: Comment line. The line is ignored.

Note: The generated 
.I data.cdb
is not binary compatible with older
versions of
.BR rbldns .
In addition, IP addresses are evaluated
at bit level to comply with the CIDR requirements.
.SH SEE ALSO
rbldns(8),
rbldns-conf(8)
.SH REFERENCE
http://cr.yp.to/djbdns.html, 
http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5782
