.TH djbdnscurve6: tinydns-conf 8
.SH NAME
tinydns-conf \- sets up a DNS publication service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tinydns-conf
.I acct
.I logacct
.I D
.I ip
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tinydns-conf
creates a service directory 
.I D
that runs
.BR tinydns .
The name 
.I D
must start with a slash
and must not contain any special characters.
Normally 
.I D
is 
.IR /var/service/tinydns .

You can run the service under
.BR svscan
by creating a symbolic link in the 
.BR svscan
directory:

ln -s 
.I D
/service

The service will start within five seconds,
and will be restarted upon reboot.
You can use
.BR svc
to control the service.

.B tinydns-conf
arranges for 
.BR tinydns
to chroot to
.IR D /root
and to run under the uid and gid of
.IR acct .
The name
.I acct
must not contain any special characters.

.B tinydns-conf
creates
.IR D /root/Makefile
to run 
.BR tinydns-data
upon request.

.B tinydns-conf
arranges for 
.BR tinydns
to listen for UDP packets on port 53 of 
.IR ip ,
and to send outgoing packets from
.IR ip .

.B tinydns-conf
creates an automatically rotated log directory in
.IR D /log/main.
The logs are owned by 
.IR logacct .
The corresponding 
.IR multilog 
processes run under the uid and gid of 
.IR logacct .
The name
.I logacct
must not contain any special characters.
.SH SEE ALSO
tinydns(8),
svscan(8),
svc(8),
multilog(8),
axfrdns-conf(8),
rbldns-conf(8),
dnscache-conf(8),
walldns-conf(8)
.SH REFERENCE
For tutorial information, see the:
http://cr.yp.to/djbdns.html
.B FAQ
.B List
(http://cr.yp.to/djbdns/faq/tinydns.html).
